src/pages/gradient-descent-scatter.mdx, before:

---
layout: ../layouts/PostLayout.astro
title: "Gradient Descent: Minimal In-Browser Python (Scatter Plot)"
author: "Chahat Deep Singh"
description: "A minimal Pyodide-powered code cell: generate and plot points. This validates the Python runner before adding gradient descent."
date: "January 18, 2026"
tags: ["optimization", "machine-learning", "gradient-descent", "pyodide"]
featured: false
---

import PyodideRunner from "../components/PyodideRunner.astro";

# Gradient Descent: An Interactive In-Python Minimal Way

This mini-demo shows three increasingly general ways to model a relationship between **x** and **y**:

1. **A line from two exact points** (deterministic geometry)
2. **Linear regression on noisy data** (best-fit line)
3. **Polynomial regression on noisy quadratic data** (best-fit curve), comparing **degree 2** (correct model class) vs **degree 6** (more flexible)

---

## 1) Line through two points (no learning)

Given two points $(x_1, y_1)$ and $(x_2, y_2)$, the unique line (if $x_1 \neq x_2$) is:

$m = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}$  
$b = y_1 - mx_1$  
$y = mx + b$

This is *not* regression—there is no notion of noise or “best fit.” The line is fully determined.

**Important edge case:** if $x_1 = x_2$, the line is vertical and cannot be written as $y = mx + b$.

---

## 2) Linear regression (degree 1) on 100 noisy samples

Now we assume the data is noisy, e.g.

$y = 3x - 1 + \epsilon$, with $\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\sigma^2)$

A line won’t pass through all points (because of noise), so we learn parameters $\theta = [b, m]^T$ that minimize squared error:

$\min_{\theta} \|X\theta - y\|_2^2$

with the design matrix:

$X =
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & x_1 \\
1 & x_2 \\
\vdots & \vdots \\
1 & x_N
\end{bmatrix}$

This is the classic least-squares solution (computed via `np.linalg.lstsq`).

---

## 3) Quadratic regression (degree 2) on quadratic data

Next we generate data from a quadratic ground truth:

$y = ax^2 + bx + c + \epsilon$

Polynomial regression of degree 2 fits:

$y \approx c + bx + ax^2$

with design matrix:

$X =
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & x_1 & x_1^2 \\
1 & x_2 & x_2^2 \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots \\
1 & x_N & x_N^2
\end{bmatrix}$

This model class matches the data-generating process, so it typically fits well and generalizes well.

---




<PyodideRunner
  id="gd_scatter_demo"
  title="Generate + plot synthetic points"
  height={240}
  autoRun={true}
  initialCode={`import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

np.random.seed(0)

# -------------------------
# 1) Line through two points
# -------------------------
x1, y1 = 1.0, 2.0
x2, y2 = 4.0, 5.5
if x2 == x1:
    raise ValueError("Vertical line: x2 == x1, cannot represent as y = m x + b.")
m = (y2 - y1) / (x2 - x1)
b = y1 - m * x1
xs = np.linspace(0, 6, 200)
ys = m * xs + b

# -------------------------
# 2) Linear data + linear regression fit
# -------------------------
N = 100
x = np.random.uniform(-2, 2, size=N)
true_m, true_b = 3.0, -1.0
sigma = 0.6
y = true_m * x + true_b + np.random.normal(0, sigma, size=N)

X_lin = np.column_stack([np.ones_like(x), x])
theta_lin, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_lin, y, rcond=None)
b_hat, m_hat = theta_lin

xg = np.linspace(x.min(), x.max(), 300)
y_true_lin = true_b + true_m * xg
y_fit_lin = b_hat + m_hat * xg

# -------------------------
# 3) Quadratic data + degree-2 polynomial regression fit (quadratic)
# -------------------------
xq = np.random.uniform(-2, 2, size=N)
true_a, true_b2, true_c = 1.5, -0.3, 2.0
yq = true_a * xq**2 + true_b2 * xq + true_c + np.random.normal(0, sigma, size=N)

# Degree-2 fit: [1, x, x^2]
X_deg2 = np.column_stack([np.ones_like(xq), xq, xq**2])
theta_deg2, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_deg2, yq, rcond=None)
c2_hat, b2_hat, a2_hat = theta_deg2

xgq = np.linspace(xq.min(), xq.max(), 400)
y_true_quad = true_a * xgq**2 + true_b2 * xgq + true_c
y_fit_deg2 = a2_hat * xgq**2 + b2_hat * xgq + c2_hat

# -------------------------
# 4) Same quadratic data + degree-6 polynomial regression fit
# -------------------------
# Degree-6 fit: [1, x, x^2, ..., x^6]
X_deg6 = np.column_stack([xq**k for k in range(7)])
theta_deg6, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_deg6, yq, rcond=None)

Xg_deg6 = np.column_stack([xgq**k for k in range(7)])
y_fit_deg6 = Xg_deg6 @ theta_deg6

# -------------------------
# Single figure with 4 subplots
# -------------------------
fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 2, figsize=(12, 8))

# Subplot 1: line through two points
ax = axes[0, 0]
ax.scatter([x1, x2], [y1, y2], label="points")
ax.plot(xs, ys, label="line")
ax.set_title("1) Line through two points")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 2: linear regression
ax = axes[0, 1]
ax.scatter(x, y, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xg, y_fit_lin, label="fit")
ax.plot(xg, y_true_lin, linestyle="--", label="true")
ax.set_title("2) Linear regression (deg 1)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 3: quadratic regression (degree 2)
ax = axes[1, 0]
ax.scatter(xq, yq, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xgq, y_fit_deg2, label="fit (deg 2)")
ax.plot(xgq, y_true_quad, linestyle="--", label="true")
ax.set_title("3) Polynomial regression (degree 2)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 4: degree-6 regression on the same quadratic data
ax = axes[1, 1]
ax.scatter(xq, yq, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xgq, y_fit_deg6, label="fit (deg 6)")
ax.plot(xgq, y_true_quad, linestyle="--", label="true (quadratic)")
ax.set_title("4) Polynomial regression (degree 6)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
`}
/>

Commit message:

Python Runtime Added Basic Regression Code Explanation 4

src/pages/gradient-descent-scatter.mdx, after:

---
layout: ../layouts/PostLayout.astro
title: "Gradient Descent: An Interactive In-Python Minimal Way"
author: "Chahat Deep Singh"
description: "A minimal Pyodide-powered code cell: generate and plot points. This validates the Python runner before adding gradient descent."
date: "January 18, 2026"
tags: ["optimization", "machine-learning", "gradient-descent", "pyodide"]
featured: false
---

import PyodideRunner from "../components/PyodideRunner.astro";

# From Linear to Polynomial Regression

This mini-demo shows three increasingly general ways to model a relationship between **x** and **y**:

1. **A line from two exact points** (deterministic geometry)
2. **Linear regression on noisy data** (best-fit line)
3. **Polynomial regression on noisy quadratic data** (best-fit curve), comparing **degree 2** (correct model class) vs **degree 6** (more flexible)

---

## 1) Line through two points (no learning)

Given two points $(x_1, y_1)$ and $(x_2, y_2)$, the unique line (if $x_1 \neq x_2$) is:

$m = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}$  
$b = y_1 - mx_1$  
$y = mx + b$

This is *not* regression—there is no notion of noise or “best fit.” The line is fully determined.

**Important edge case:** if $x_1 = x_2$, the line is vertical and cannot be written as $y = mx + b$.

---

## 2) Linear regression (degree 1) on 100 noisy samples

Now we assume the data is noisy, e.g.

$y = 3x - 1 + \epsilon$, with $\epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0,\sigma^2)$

A line won’t pass through all points (because of noise), so we learn parameters $\theta = [b, m]^T$ that minimize squared error:

$\min_{\theta} \|X\theta - y\|_2^2$

with the design matrix:

$X =
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & x_1 \\
1 & x_2 \\
\vdots & \vdots \\
1 & x_N
\end{bmatrix}$

This is the classic least-squares solution (computed via `np.linalg.lstsq`).

---

## 3) Quadratic regression (degree 2) on quadratic data

Next we generate data from a quadratic ground truth:

$y = ax^2 + bx + c + \epsilon$

Polynomial regression of degree 2 fits:

$y \approx c + bx + ax^2$

with design matrix:

$X =
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & x_1 & x_1^2 \\
1 & x_2 & x_2^2 \\
\vdots & \vdots & \vdots \\
1 & x_N & x_N^2
\end{bmatrix}$

This model class matches the data-generating process, so it typically fits well and generalizes well.

---




<PyodideRunner
  id="gd_scatter_demo"
  title="Generate + plot synthetic points"
  height={240}
  autoRun={true}
  initialCode={`import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

np.random.seed(0)

# -------------------------
# 1) Line through two points
# -------------------------
x1, y1 = 1.0, 2.0
x2, y2 = 4.0, 5.5
if x2 == x1:
    raise ValueError("Vertical line: x2 == x1, cannot represent as y = m x + b.")
m = (y2 - y1) / (x2 - x1)
b = y1 - m * x1
xs = np.linspace(0, 6, 200)
ys = m * xs + b

# -------------------------
# 2) Linear data + linear regression fit
# -------------------------
N = 100
x = np.random.uniform(-2, 2, size=N)
true_m, true_b = 3.0, -1.0
sigma = 0.6
y = true_m * x + true_b + np.random.normal(0, sigma, size=N)

X_lin = np.column_stack([np.ones_like(x), x])
theta_lin, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_lin, y, rcond=None)
b_hat, m_hat = theta_lin

xg = np.linspace(x.min(), x.max(), 300)
y_true_lin = true_b + true_m * xg
y_fit_lin = b_hat + m_hat * xg

# -------------------------
# 3) Quadratic data + degree-2 polynomial regression fit (quadratic)
# -------------------------
xq = np.random.uniform(-2, 2, size=N)
true_a, true_b2, true_c = 1.5, -0.3, 2.0
yq = true_a * xq**2 + true_b2 * xq + true_c + np.random.normal(0, sigma, size=N)

# Degree-2 fit: [1, x, x^2]
X_deg2 = np.column_stack([np.ones_like(xq), xq, xq**2])
theta_deg2, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_deg2, yq, rcond=None)
c2_hat, b2_hat, a2_hat = theta_deg2

xgq = np.linspace(xq.min(), xq.max(), 400)
y_true_quad = true_a * xgq**2 + true_b2 * xgq + true_c
y_fit_deg2 = a2_hat * xgq**2 + b2_hat * xgq + c2_hat

# -------------------------
# 4) Same quadratic data + degree-6 polynomial regression fit
# -------------------------
# Degree-6 fit: [1, x, x^2, ..., x^6]
X_deg6 = np.column_stack([xq**k for k in range(7)])
theta_deg6, *_ = np.linalg.lstsq(X_deg6, yq, rcond=None)

Xg_deg6 = np.column_stack([xgq**k for k in range(7)])
y_fit_deg6 = Xg_deg6 @ theta_deg6

# -------------------------
# Single figure with 4 subplots
# -------------------------
fig, axes = plt.subplots(2, 2, figsize=(12, 8))

# Subplot 1: line through two points
ax = axes[0, 0]
ax.scatter([x1, x2], [y1, y2], label="points")
ax.plot(xs, ys, label="line")
ax.set_title("1) Line through two points")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 2: linear regression
ax = axes[0, 1]
ax.scatter(x, y, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xg, y_fit_lin, label="fit")
ax.plot(xg, y_true_lin, linestyle="--", label="true")
ax.set_title("2) Linear regression (deg 1)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 3: quadratic regression (degree 2)
ax = axes[1, 0]
ax.scatter(xq, yq, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xgq, y_fit_deg2, label="fit (deg 2)")
ax.plot(xgq, y_true_quad, linestyle="--", label="true")
ax.set_title("3) Polynomial regression (degree 2)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

# Subplot 4: degree-6 regression on the same quadratic data
ax = axes[1, 1]
ax.scatter(xq, yq, s=20, label="data")
ax.plot(xgq, y_fit_deg6, label="fit (deg 6)")
ax.plot(xgq, y_true_quad, linestyle="--", label="true (quadratic)")
ax.set_title("4) Polynomial regression (degree 6)")
ax.set_xlabel("x"); ax.set_ylabel("y")
ax.legend()

plt.tight_layout()
plt.show()
`}
/>
